docs(mempool): Intro to ADR on QoS (#2888)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/references/architecture/adr-113-mempool-lanes.md

all classes can be ordered by priority.

Now, given these definitions, we want the proposed QoS mechanism to offer the following property:

:parking: _Property_ **Priorities between classes**: Transactions belonging to a certain class will
be processed and disseminated before transactions belonging to another class with lower priority.

Formally, given two transaction classes `c1` and `c2`, with `c1` having more priority than `c2`, if
the application assigns via `CheckTx` the classes `c1` and `c2` respectively to transactions `tx1`
and `tx2`, then `tx1` will be processed and disseminated before `tx2`.

More importantly, as a direct consequence of this property, `tx1` will have a lower latency than
`tx2`, because `tx1` will be disseminated faster and it will be included in a block before `tx2`.
Currently, it is not possible to guarantee this kind of property.

:memo: _Definition_: The *latency of a transaction* is the difference between the time at which the
transaction was received for the first time by a node, and the timestamp of the block in which the
transaction finally was included.

We want also to keep the FIFO ordering within each class:

> :parking: _Property_ **Sequential ordering per class**: For transactions within the same class, the

Reviewer: Nit. Reuse the same terminology, 'FIFO', as above. Or am I missing something?

Author: That's right. I changed it to FIFO.

## Changelog

- 2024-04-12: Initial notes (@hvanz)
- 2024-04-12: Comments on the notes (@sergio-mena)
- 2024-04-17: Discussions (@sergio-mena @hvanz)
- 2024-04-18: Preliminary structure (@hvanz)
- 2024-05-01: Add Context and Properties (@hvanz)

## Status

In writing (we're not sure yet whether this will be an ADR or a spec)

## Context

In the current implementation, the only property that the mempool tries to enforce when processing
and disseminating transactions is maintaining the order in which transactions arrive to the nodes,
that is, a FIFO ordering. However, ensuring a strict transmission order over the network proves
challenging due to inherent characteristics of the underlying communication protocols that causes

> message delays and potential reordering. Consequently, while Tendermint Core and CometBFT
> applications have always assumed this supposed ordering, the FIFO-ness of transactions is not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
message delays and potential reordering. Consequently, while many Tendermint Core and CometBFT
applications have always assumed this ordering always holds, the FIFO-ness of transactions is not
```

guaranteed and is offered only as a best effort.

Beyond the apparent FIFO sequencing, transactions in the mempool are treated equally, meaning that
they are not discriminated as to which are disseminated first or which transactions the mempool
offers to the proposer when creating the next block. In practice, however, not all transactions have
the same importance for the application logic, especially when it comes to latency requirements.

> Depending on the application, we may think on countless categories of transactions based on their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the application, we may think of countless categories of transactions based on their
```

importance and requirements, spanning from IBC messages, transactions for exchanges, for smart
contract execution, for smart contract deployment, grouped by SDK modules, and so on. Even
transactions prioritized by economic incentives could be given a preferential treatment. Or big
transactions, regardless of their nature, could be categorized as low priority, to mitigate
potential attacks on the mempool.

The goal of this document is thus to propose a mechanism enabling the mempool to prioritize

> transactions by *classes*, for processing and dissemination, directly impacting block creation. In

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transactions by *classes*, for processing and dissemination, directly impacting block creation and transaction latency. In
```

IP networking terminology, this is known as Quality of Service (QoS). By providing certain QoS

> guarantees, developers will be able to more easily estimate when transactions will be processed and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
guarantees, developers will be able to more easily estimate when transactions will be disseminated, processed and
```

included in a block. 

In practical terms, we envision an implementation of the transaction class abstraction as *mempool
lanes*. The application will be allowed to split the mempool transaction space into a hierarchy of
lanes, with each lane operating as an independent mempool. At the same time, all of them need to be
coordinated to ensure the delivery of the desired levels of QoS.

Note that improving the dissemination protocol to reduce bandwidth and/or latency is a separate

> concern and falls outside the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
concern and falls outside the scope of this proposal. Likewise, graceful degradation under high load is an orthogonal problem to transaction classification, although the latter may help improve the former. 
```
With this edit, I'm seeking to address some of Zaki's points in yesterday's meeting

## Properties

Before jumping into the design of the proposal, we define more formally the properties supported by
the current implementation of the mempool. Then we state what properties the new mempool should
offer to guarantee the desired QoS.

The following definition is common to all properties. 

:memo: _Definition_: Given any two different transactions `tx1` and `tx2`, we say that `tx1` is
*processed and disseminated before* `tx2`, when:
- `tx1` is reaped from the mempool to form a block proposal before `tx2`,

> - `tx1` is rechecked before `tx2`, and

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to imagine why _recheck_ is important here

Author: For FIFO ordering. If tx2 is rechecked before tx1, one of the two or both may become invalid and removed from the mempool. I'm not 100% sure that we need to keep rechecking in the list.

> - `tx1` is disseminated to a peer before `tx2`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `tx1` is disseminated to a given peer before `tx2`.
```

Note that in the current implementation there is one dissemination routine per peer, so it could
happen that `tx2` is sent to a peer before `tx1` is sent to a different peer.

### Current mempool

As stated above, the current mempool offers a best-effort FIFO ordering of transactions. We state
this property as follows.

:parking: _Property_ **FIFO ordering of transactions**: We say that the mempool makes a best effort

> in maintaining the FIFO ordering of transactions when transactions are validated, processed, and

Reviewer 2: When you say "processed" in this sentence, what do you have in mind? Added to the mempool? Run CheckTX on it?

Author: "processed and disseminated" as defined in the previous definition. I clarified in the text.

disseminated in the same order in which the mempool has received them.

> More formally, given any two different transactions `tx1` and `tx2`, if the mempool receives `tx1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More formally, given any two different transactions `tx1` and `tx2`, if a node's mempool receives `tx1`
```

before receiving `tx2`, then:
- `tx1` will be validated against the application (via `CheckTx`) before `tx2`, and
- `tx1` will be processed and disseminated before `tx2`.

Note that a node's mempool can receive a transaction either from a `broadcast_tx_*` RPC endpoint or
from a peer.

> 

Reviewer 2: I would add a couple of sentences here reiterating that this property _guarantees_ FIFO at at given node, but it cannot _just_ be generalised to the whole network... hence FIFO is best-effort at the network level.

Author: Done.

### Mempool with QoS

With the introduction of *transaction classes*, the main goal is to guarantee that certain

> transactions have lower latency than others. 

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to introduce a definition (probably above) of transaction latency?

Reviewer 2: Oops! Forget this comment, I see it is defined below. Consider moving that definition up, as we use the term here.

Author: Done. Moved the definition.

:memo: _Definition_: a *transaction class* is a disjoint set of transactions having some common
characteristics as defined by the application.

A transaction may only have one class. If it is not assigned any specific class, it will be assigned
a *default class*, which is a special class always present in any set of classes. Because no

> transaction can belong to two or more classes, transaction classes form a disjoint set. Also, all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transaction can belong to two or more classes, transaction classes form disjoint sets. Also, all
```

transactions in the mempool are the union of the transactions in all classes.

> :memo: _Definition_: Each class has a *priority* and two classes cannot have the same priority. Then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:memo: _Definition_: Each class has a *priority* and two classes cannot have the same priority. Therefore
```
just a suggestion

all classes can be ordered by priority.

Now, given these definitions, we want the proposed QoS mechanism to offer the following property:

:parking: _Property_ **Priorities between classes**: Transactions belonging to a certain class will

> be processed and disseminated before transactions belonging to another class with lower priority.

Reviewer 2: > processed and disseminated

and included in a block?

Author: tx1 being included in a block before tx2 is a consequence of this property. It is mentioned two paragraphs below.

Formally, given two transaction classes `c1` and `c2`, with `c1` having more priority than `c2`, if

> the application assigns via `CheckTx` the classes `c1` and `c2` respectively to transactions `tx1`

Reviewer 2: > via `CheckTx`

Do you think that's rather decided at implementation level?

Author: Right, I remove "via CheckTx"

and `tx2`, then `tx1` will be processed and disseminated before `tx2`.

More importantly, as a direct consequence of this property, `tx1` will have a lower latency than
`tx2`, because `tx1` will be disseminated faster and it will be included in a block before `tx2`.
Currently, it is not possible to guarantee this kind of property.

:memo: _Definition_: The *latency of a transaction* is the difference between the time at which the

> transaction was received for the first time by a node, and the timestamp of the block in which the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transaction was received for the first time by any node, and the timestamp of the block in which the
```
Not sure about this. The problem I have with the current wording is that, when I read it first I thought you were referring to "at each node"... so latency was defined per-node, whereas I now think that's not what you mean, but rather the time the transaction hits the first node in the network.

Author: I reworded it. It should be any node in the network, not per node.

transaction finally was included.

> We want also to keep the FIFO ordering within each class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want also to keep the FIFO ordering within each class (for the time being):
```

> :parking: _Property_ **FIFO ordering per class**: For transactions within the same class, the
> mempool will make its best effort to maintain a FIFO ordering when they are validated, processed,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:parking: _Property_ **FIFO ordering per class**: For transactions within the same class, the
mempool will maintain FIFO order at a node when they are validated, processed,
```

and disseminated.

Given any two different transactions `tx1` and `tx2` belonging to the same class, if the mempool
receives `tx1` before receiving `tx2`, then:
- `tx1` will be validated against the application (via `CheckTx`) before `tx2`, and
- `tx1` will be processed and disseminated before `tx2`.

As a consequence, given that classes of transactions have a sequential ordering, and that all

> classes are disjunct, we can state the following property:

Reviewer 2: Not a native speaker so can't say for sure... but you used _disjoint_ above and _disjunct_ here. Are we sure they have the same meaning?

Author: I changed it to "classes do not have elements in common".

:parking: _Property_ **Partial ordering of all transactions**: The set of all the transactions in

> the mempool, regardless of their classes, will have a *partial order*. This means that some pairs of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the mempool, regardless of their classes, will have a *partial order*.

This means that some pairs of
```
